He suggested, if I ask you this too, that a lot of
people did pursue law around that time, though,
because they were ineffective in combating the
legal system through protest and such. Would you
agree with that? Yes. Also, are you a member of any
radical-type lawyers' guild? I'm a member of the
National Lawyers' Guild and the American Civil
Lawyers' Union. I cooperate as an attorney
representing people on those cases. In fact, a few
years ago, the Houston Police Department had a
policy when they arrested someone of placing them
on hold if they weren't quite sure what charges
they were going to bring. And they would keep
people on this hold status, which was clearly
unconstitutional sometimes for days. And I've
wrote a lawsuit. as a cooperating attorney with
the ACLU to stop this practice, to make them,
within 24 hours, either charge someone or release
them, and was successful in district court and
federal court. And the policy has since had to
change because of that. I think that the legal, I
guess I'm involved in a few other types of cases
like that. It's a situation where I think a lot of
people turned to the legal system. And in law
school, I met a lot of people who were interested in
doing
that. OK. Getting back to when you were suspended,
how did that feel? I mean, was there just complete
hostility when they laid down? Well, I was almost
in a feeling of disbelief. Like, are they really
doing this over this? Are they really suspending
me for sitting on the grass? It was an incredulous.
a feeling of, I can't believe this is happening. I
can't believe they're really doing this because I
sat on the grass. That was the initial reaction.
And how did it feel when you were let back in school
three weeks later? It felt great. I mean, the
attorney called with the news that the Fifth
Circuit had agreed to let us back in school. It felt
good, like we'd been vindicated. Or at least,
initially, the courts thought that what we did
wasn't so terrible. And in fact, they even thought
that we had some likelihood of prevailing on the
merits. And therefore, they were letting us back
in school to finish. What did your parents think
when they found out? They were happy I was being
allowed back in school. They were upset. They were
very upset that I was suspended. They couldn't
understand why I would do anything which would
lead to a suspension. They also saw it as one of
ruining my career or future or that sort of thing,
so it was very upsetting to me. Who actually said
you guys were after suspending? The dean of
students at that time, Floyd Martin, was the
person who came with the rope. The rope was held by
the football team. Oh gosh! In fact, we had even a
black football player right beside the dean
holding the rope and telling us that that was it.
Where did everybody else go, these 3,000 people?
Well, I won't say there weren't 3,000 people at
that point. I'd say there must have been at least
200 on the grass. But people decided they just
weren't going to get suspended. I mean, if the
3,000 were, I would say it would be a conservative
estimate of what we had that night after the
suspension. And where did they meet? It was at the
administration library building, this huge
area. How did you get them together? That was
almost spontaneous. Was it in anger because of the
suspension? Yeah, because of the suspension.
They just felt like that had gone too far. And did
y'all start chants or screaming? There was
chants. There was a lot of screaming. There was a
lot of chanting. I mean, it was just, it was a lot of
people were very angry. And how come the
administration didn't come over there and try to
do something else? I don't know. I just, I'm sure at
that point they couldn't, you know. They probably
got a little scared. Yeah, there was just too many
people. They just didn't know what was going to
happen. But, you know, on the actual, I mean, one of
the noticed side here, Dean Martin, who was the one
who read us the suspension letter, was
subsequently fired from the university for
stealing school funds.
And lost his job sometime in the, I think, late 70s
or middle 70s. was fired for, you know, stealing
monies. What were you thinking, though, when you
were just sitting there on that grass, and there
was just nine of you all there, and that's it, and
here they come? What was going through your head?
Well, of course, when they first came, it was still
Phil. And then when the dean read the letter
saying, you've got three minutes to leave or you
will be suspended, then a lot of people left. But I
had decided that I was not doing anything illegal,
anything in violation of the law. that I was
exercising my constitutional right to free
speech. And I wasn't stopping or blocking
anyone's path. I wasn't doing anything like that.
And I couldn't believe that they'd really be doing
this now. My feeling is they're wrong, and I'm not
going to let them get away with this. I'm not going
to let you get away with violating my rights. And
that was the feeling. I've got a right to be doing
this, and you're not going to stop me. Were there
any blacks in your little group? There were some
blacks in the demonstration, but the blacks at
that time had their own organization. And I think
they were somewhat suspicious of the student
mobilization committee. It was predominantly
white, and there was still a lot of uneasiness in
that, and a lot of them had not joined it. Your
group, did they ever organize march in support of
civil rights? Well, at that point, that never came
up as an issue. I mean, it wasn't a point at which
some black student or black professor had been and
had his rights violated or something. None of
those issues ever arose. The issue of this foreign
student came up, that he was Persian. But the
blacks seemed not to be very politically involved
from the standpoint uh, demonstration or
protest. They, most of the blacks seemed very much
interested in making it or advancing in the
system, scoring brownie points with the
administration. And so even their political
organization was very limited in what it would do
to challenge the administration or protest. You
mentioned, uh, threats and such. Did those come
after the second moratorium, after the first one,
were reinstated in school? They came, the threats
came even before the first moratorium, but after
the first they became more pronounced, and
certainly after the second it was. Although they
were just mainly threats from people passing cars
or things like that, it was never, you know, I was
never beaten up. At one point I was almost hit by a
car, but seeing cars seem to be the way they like to
do things in. Never really had a, I had some
confrontations where people would be trying to
dare me to say if I'd do something or block my path on
the street, but nothing more serious than that.
Ever any phone calls? Yeah, there were phone
calls. What were you going to say? We're going to
get you. We're going to kill you. Get out of here,
Yankee agitator. Things like that. The great
thing, though, about the university system at
that point was that if you didn't hang up the phone,
you could trace the call. I think that probably
discouraged people from making those kind of
phone calls. Would you ever say anything back to
them that you provoked in any way? No, I wouldn't do
anything, I wouldn't say anything to them. In any
confrontations, did you ever get to the point
where you just wanted to provoke someone because
they looked... No, I just knew. I mean, I wanted to,
but I didn't. That was not the proven course to
take. along a very conservative line with your
protest. Yeah, as far as basically it was a
nonviolent type approach. And I felt that that was
the best way to do it. What did you think of the more
violent type approaches, such as draft card
burning, sit-ins? Well, I thought sit-ins could
at times be effective. But I was aware of what we had
at Southwest Texas State, that we couldn't give
the police and the administration a chance beat us
up or arrest us because they would do it. And I just
thought that that was a step that we should not
take. And when you've been like sitting in New York
or sitting in another large city, the results
would have been much worse.
Your activism, especially when you got down to
Southwest, was it an everyday thing? Was it very
intense? Were you watching TV every day looking
for the death counts or was it just well, I need to
work on this protest coming up. How did you
approach this? No, I'd say it was fairly intense in
that once we started getting things going, it was
an almost daily. I mean, almost some part of my day
was spent planning or working with other people.
It was just almost an everyday thing. And of
course, then your whole social activities were
less. At some point, you were doing things
relating to the organization or the
demonstration. Oh, I see. What did you think of
Nixon and LBJ then? Well, you didn't like what
Nixon said. What did you think of both of those
presidents back then and how you feel about them
now? Well, of LBJ, I thought that initially, you
know, he was really concerned about social policy
and really was trying to make a good attempt to
improve the economic conditions in the country. I
think where he got sidetracked was thinking he
could be both, you know, fight a war I thought he was
not properly informed by advisors, by
intelligence estimates, of what was really
happening in South Vietnam. And I think the
decisions he made were just tragic, because I
think had he chosen to back out of Vietnam,
the economic condition of the country could have
greatly improved. Unfortunately, he did not.
Yeah, I think that LBJ, I see him as being more of a
person with genuine concern about people in the
country, as opposed to Nixon that I see as being
extremely cold and calculated. Although I think
LBJ, once he realized what had happened, he didn't
have the courage to say, look, I've been wrong,
which he could have done in 66 or 67 and just changed
things around. By the time the Tet Offensive, it
was too late. And then he had to withdraw from the
candidacy. But I think he didn't have the courage
to really, in 66 or 67, just back out and change the
policy. I think he had gotten so involved in it that
he couldn't do a turnaround, as he should have. And
it would have saved many lives and many problems
that the country faced over the next several
years. What about Mr. Netzer? I see him, I mean, you
know, the term tricky dick just sums it all up. I
mean, he's just a person who's very cold, very
calculating, a person who essentially was
elected as someone who would probably end the war
or be better equipped to end the war. He campaigned
in 68, and I've got this secret plan in my pocket,
you know, I'll end this war, and then proceeded to
escalate.
The thing is, he was just always a rabid
anti-communist, always saw things in terms of
communist versus anti-communist. And I think he
was a terrible leader for our country at that time
because of that fact. I mean, he was basically
schooled in the 40s or late 40s type of containment
communism. I don't think that the man had the
ability to really lead
the country. He was also very paranoid. He saw
every protest as someone who hated him. It was a
personal attack against him, because they were
protesting his policies. And you can't lead a
nation with that kind of attitude, that kind of
outlook. And for that reason, I just found him
repulsive. And then, of course, he was a late
alert. He was also very crooked. How'd you feel
about that, the Watergate? Well, I thought. You
know, it was to be expected. I wasn't surprised by
what he had done. I was surprised that he finally
got caught. But I wasn't surprised by what he had
done. How did you feel with the invasion of
Cambodia in 1970? That, to me, was just
outrageous. I mean, I just, what I feared was that
we'd be drawn into an even bigger war. That instead
of learning from what had been happening in the
last several years in Vietnam, we were ignoring
it. And taking this, to me, imbecilic approach of,
well, we just conquer all of Southeast Asia. The
way to, we were still trying to win the war and
thinking, well, if we just did more bombing, more
weapons, somehow we'd win. And to me, it was
ludicrous. Do you think that stems from the fact
that they'd always won? Yeah. I think
particularly Nixon was of this idea, America
always wins a war. And we'll do, obviously, we're
not winning. So rather than back out or just
realize this is not We had no business being here. I
mean, no one, neither Johnson nor Nixon, could
ever admit, it was a mistake to be here. Let's just
get out. We had to win. And so you had Nixon's
bombings and his ludicrous activities. When you
went back to City College in 1970, did you continue
your career? Yeah, I was involved in some anti-war
activities. Although, at that point, I guess, It
was a matter of being somewhat involved, but it
wasn't the same, because there were lots of people
involved in organizing activities. There were
always people willing to do things. It wasn't like
Southwest, where there wasn't someone to take on
the leadership. So you kind of sat back and
participated. I participated, but did not assume
any, you know, was involved in some any war
activities in organizing or participating in the
organization of some. Not to the extent that I did
in San Marcos. The students there at City College,
were they aware of what you had done at Southwell?
Some were that I'd talked to, but I mean, nothing. I
mean, it was not. I mean, the thing was, the kind of
reaction was to me, they suspended you for that.
Just a look of disbelief.
When you were protesting and such, when you were
organizing those groups of people to stand out
against the war, Did that give you any kind of sense
of power? And also, did you feel like you were
accomplishing anything? Well, I certainly felt
like we were accomplishing something, that we
were letting the community, the university, and
hopefully the decision makers or policymakers in
government realize that there was a significant
sector that disagreed and disapproved their
policies. I mean, there was a sense of power in the
sense of getting people to organize or people to
orchestrate this same belief that you had, this
massive outpouring of feelings. But I think it was
less a feeling of power and more a feeling of
accomplishment that we were getting a message
across, or at least trying to, and at least having
it heard or having a number of people show up to
express the same Did you say it was fun what you were
doing, or was it more serious business? It was
serious. I never felt like it was really fun. I
mean, sometimes it was a sense of satisfaction. A
lot of times, a sense of frustration.
Never quite fun.
Fun then was jumping out of airplanes. It still is.
But it wouldn't really say fun. a sense of
satisfaction at times. How did you, you had the S2
college deferment, but after you, did you just
continue with that when you went to law school? No,
what happened was they instituted the lottery
system in December of 70, or December of 69, and my
number, while not being very high, by the time I
finished, or the time my 2S deferment ran out,
which was in 71, they were not reaching my number,
is basically what it came down to. If you had been
drafted, would you have gone? No. I would have
applied for a conscientious objector status, and
if not, would have refused. Fortunately, I didn't
have to come to that point, but I couldn't see
myself going in the military. What did you think of
the people who did conform and get? Well, it's kind
of hard to judge them. What distressed me was not so
much the people who believed in what the
government was doing and going, but the people who
didn't want to go but went anyway. I suppose I had
less respect for them and felt that if everyone who
had reservations about the Vietnam War would just
speak out and refuse to go, they wouldn't have an
army over there. And that's what was distressing
the people who just felt like, well, I've got to do
this, even though I don't want to, even though I
don't believe in what I'm doing. And so we had a lot
of people in Vietnam who didn't want to be there,
didn't believe in what they were doing. And that
was distressing to me, that people would just go
ahead and be pushed into that and allow themselves
to be put in that situation. I mean, I can
intellectually understand why and what they were
doing, but emotionally it was very upsetting.
Well, how did you feel when the troops were drawn? I
felt good about that. I thought that was,
unfortunately, just too late. I mean, it was
satisfying that the government was finally doing
it, but what seemed so sad was that the government
didn't do it 10 years earlier. Did you lose any
friends? I had one or two friends from my
neighborhood in Brooklyn who were injured or
killed in Vietnam. How did you feel about that?
That was very upsetting. Very, very upsetting.
Realizing it could be me or just the situation that
it was all so needless. Was your father in the
service at all? Yeah, he was in the Army, too. Was
he? Did he see any acts of him? Some in the Pacific.
Did you ever have any confrontations with him
about your opinions? No, I think my father, I
think, and the, I guess after this happened, he had
some understanding that I think he was beginning
to, I think like a lot of adults or some adults, in
the question of what we were doing there, that this
was a war that was just going on and on and on, and
nothing was really happening. And especially
after the Tet Offensive, people began to say, why
are we still there? So we never had any real
confrontations, but I think he began to
understand my
feelings. In the demonstrations, the people that
participated, they were mainly students, but you
mentioned that some faculty and community
members participated. Did the administrators
ever try to get anyone to speak, or was that just
your thing, trying to get the faculty to speak? The
administration, did they ever offer to get people
to speak? No, they would have nothing to do with it.
And the community people, were they just business
people? Yeah, they were pretty much just business
people who did not want to get involved. The
professors who spoke subsequently, some of them
lost their jobs, except for the tenured ones. But
everyone who spoke who did not have tenure was
subsequently lost. And some professors I
approached would not speak for fear of a process.
You mentioned in the interview you had a
confrontation in a demonstration in May of 1970.
Is that at the vigil or is that something else? That
wasn't at the vigil. The day of the vigil, which we
had,
we were going to lower the American flag, is what we
had planned to do. And we surrounded the flag by the
Evans Academic Center. And we're going to lower it
to half-staff, or half-mast. But then decided not
to. And instead, because what happened was the
administration just sent down a lot of the cowboys
to surround us. And it looked like there was going
to be a bloodbath or a fairly violent
confrontation. So at that point, we just sang a
patriotic song and then invited anyone to
discuss. And there was a discussion that went on
for about two hours between people. Who started
singing? It was my idea at that point. Really?
Because I realized they were looking for blood,
and the administration was just going to look the
other way. Yeah. I mean, they were clear. one of the
people in our group had a wire cutter that was going
to lower the flag. And I realized that if he did
that, that would have just been violence. Uh-huh.
And you said there were no arrests there because of
the nonviolent activity? That's right, there
were
not any. That covers about everything that I
wanted to to dig into. Is there anything else that
you feel needs to be added in the statement you'd
like to make? Let
me ask you this. What do you think about our
situation in Nicaragua right now? I think it's a
situation where we have no business being there. I
think we ought to let the whatever rebels in the
government fight it out if if that's what's going
to be done there. We should not, I just, I don't
think we should be involved in supporting, it's
just as wrong for us to be there supporting someone
we like as it would be for us to be supporting
someone we didn't like. Or to be, it's wrong for us
to criticize Russia for supplying weapons and
supplies to one side as it is for us to be in there. I
mean, the government has always had this attitude
that, If the regime is pro-American, then it's
okay for us to support them. And I just find that
difficult. I don't agree with it. And I still have a
lot of problems with the government's policies,
but I think that certainly after the Vietnam War,
there seems to be, it's more acceptable for people
to speak out, to organize, to protest. I think the
civil rights demonstrations of the early 60s,
which was a forerunner of the late 60s, But the
difference was that you had large amounts of white
youth involved in the 60s that you really did not in
the early 60s in civil rights demonstrations.
I think people now accept that you can have
demonstrations, you can protest. I mean, back
then, if you can imagine, it was very unusual,
especially in San Marcos or a lot of smaller
cities. In Texas, in the South? I'd say in the South
and the Midwest. It was very unusual. I mean, we've
become really conditioned to protest the
demonstrations. But in the late 60s, that was
still something new, something unusual.
So I think that that's one benefit overall that's
come out of that period, is that demonstrations
and protests are acceptable. just for civil
rights demonstrations. They're there for
everybody with some sort of grievance or some sort
of complaint about the government. It's just more
acceptable to do that. I mean, back at that time,
the middle to late 60s, that was not acceptable. I
mean, again, it was akin to being unpatriotic or
seditious. And that whole attitude has
completely changed. OK. Is there anything else
you'd like to add? No, I think that's enough.
That's plenty, believe me. OK. One of my.